Speaker 1  0:00  
Breath. Well, good morning, good afternoon, everyone. I think I'm snake bit, because last time I was the presenter, we had tech problems, but today it was in the microphone system. So I'm just going to speak loud, and it's coming in over the computer microphone, so it won't be quite as high quality as it usually is for our webcast, and I'll get it fixed for next month. So I'm going to present this family. This is the CB family, and the reason I picked them is because I Well, they've been challenging in a very good way, and they made me think a lot about the intricacies of reciprocity. So I'm going to tell you a little bit about the family, and I'm barely having trouble hearing you. I'm going to I can't talk a whole lot louder than this. I can tell you a little bit about the family, and then I'm going to do to some diagrams that I've drawn for them and for myself over the times I've been working with them to help myself explicate my understanding and to show it to them for what it might be worth in their own learning. So these are the people that I see, and this is the nuclear family that I'm going to be discussing. I encountered them first when they were both in the Bowen center post graduate training program, and I was their supervisor, and they both continued with supervision after they left the program. So they continued when they were in the training program, they would be hearing each other present, because they would be in a group supervision format. But when they continued on in the years afterwards, they would be one on one sessions, and they're, they're both very bright, very capable, serious students of Bowen theory. And you know, they continue to push their edge and try to learn. But it was, was my impression in seeing them separately that they really were, what would I say, stuck to a certain degree in the marriage and having a hard time seeing reciprocity their own parts, and seeing not blaming the other. So what happened is that in January of 2017 the husband contacted me and said that things had gone to a minor hell in a hand basket with their older son, and they needed help, and they wanted help, and I said at that point, I have to see you together. This is not going to work unless I see you together. And they agreed. And so since January of 17, and my, my thought was from when he told me that, you know, they were going to have to address both the marriage and the triangle with the sun if they were going to get anywhere on the problems that he was presenting. So in January 17, we started meeting. As it's recent. I don't have the exact date of when this technique that I'm using I started, but in the earlier days, they were especially reactive to each other and what they were going through as a family, and it was very difficult for them to not ping off of each other in the session. I'm not sure how many minutes out I said to them, I can't do it like this anymore. This is what I want to do. Each one of you gets a half hour, but we all three meet together. So that's the basic structure since then, although, as they have improved and toned down the reactivity between the two of them, I am able to go back and forth more. And if it's an issue where it might be useful to go back and. Forth on what I do is ask the one who's on their half hour if it would be useful for them to hear the others thinking and and then we just go back and forth. So that has, I think, really helped, and it has certainly made the sessions much more thought provoking. I think that some of you who are connected with the Missouri, Kansas City Center would have, in fact, seen a video of the two of them when I did the summer conference there last year, speaking about the progress that we were making and what they saw as the work to be done. So what had happened with this son number one is that he was, at that point, a senior in high school, and he was, um, depressed, and things were very tense in the triangle, and he would periodically run away from home and Stay with friends overnight, and they would be so worried they would want to chase him and find him. It was pretty hot. Suicide was hanging in the air. Hospital, psychiatric hospitalization was hanging in the air. So anyway, we started, things did calm down with him. He did not get accepted at the College of his choice, and chose not to go to his second choice. So after he graduated high school, he had a gap year. The next year, he did get accepted at a college of his choice, and he has just completed his freshman or sophomore year at that university. Meanwhile, number two was slumping in her high school, and there was a good deal of concern about this guy, very high academic achieving. Kind of internal, emotionally internalizing. High academic achieving. Kind of guy No worries about his academic achievement. She, on the other hand, they've got hard functioning at work. Has this has a spotty issue of having jobs and earning money and contributing to his upkeep. She, on the other hand, is a very reliable worker. What jobs won her back. She's being invited back for the summer, but struggled academically and was in danger of flunking out of the big public high school in area where they live in California. Mother lobbied for a private, small, private high school. We had a lot of reservations about whether that was rescuing her, but eventually decided to go with it. She did complete high school, she got accepted at a decent college on the East Coast, and she's just finished her freshman year of college successfully. Let me back up and tell you a little bit about their families. He is the youngest of these seven children from Saskatchewan. His father had tried to run insurance adjustments, business that failed, and he was a farmer. He had an eighth grade education. He died in 97 at the age of 77 his mother just died this last year. She had a teacher's school education, but she was primarily a homemaker. I think I have to ask him whether she worked outside of the home. These arrows down because there's lots of kids on each family, are that they reproduced. The next oldest brother to him, and there's nine years between them, died of AIDS and was gay and

Speaker 1  9:45  
he came east to go to college, and that's where they met. She is the third of four. Her in a Connecticut family. Her father had his own insurance agency. Her mother was a high powered attorney, law school, pioneer for the undertrodden in the legal profession, Professor of Law School, quite a star, and I've just put her extended family in because she was the youngest of all these this son died, of all these girls, and she was the golden girl. And these sisters who were in the area clustered around her and supported them. One of them actually was like the nanny for these children, and her husband also supported her, and so she was sort of very high functioning, but with a lot of people pushing her up and keeping her up there. This is a high achieving group here. This is an attorney. This is an MBA. This is Director of Governmental relations for a major university in Connecticut. She is an attorney and a professor in law school, and ended up, ironically, teaching in the same area where her mother was the pioneer in the field. Originally, she's now in a program director in a program at a major university in California that has to do with international development in education. He graduated from college, she went to law school. He graduated from college. He traveled and worked as a travel writer and lived abroad. Loves to travel a talented writer, and lived abroad for a while, and then he went to divinity school and was a clergyman, and then a Kerr fusion occurred where he was accused of some inappropriate behavior with the parishioner, and it resulted in him discontinuing functioning as a clergy person while she was teaching at a University in Pennsylvania, he made a try at a graduate program in Family Studies, ran into a lot of attention with people in The program, and eventually left and after that time, shortly before they moved to California for her to take this position, he basically functioned as the in home parent. Interestingly enough, not he her father worked, but he certainly was supportive of her mother's career, and he ended up sort of supporting his wife's career, doing a lot of work at home, being the primary caretaking parent, taking care of a lot of the household and finances, but not working.

Unknown Speaker  13:19  
I think that's all I want to say about this. Just want to talk briefly

Speaker 1  13:29  
about the triangles with the kids. This would be the triangle with the older son. Mom has a very positive she would call it fusion relationship with the son. Dad had a lot of involvement and investment with him when he was young, working with him on his academics. Um, and then as he got older, it got more scratch, and it's pretty scratchy right now. Um, he recently, in the last year, announced that he considers himself gay. I think they're doing quite well with that myself, of course, that will talk about secretly hoping that it doesn't stay that way, but they're doing pretty well this can actually get physical,

Unknown Speaker  14:44  
and it can be really hot, and he can be very

Speaker 1  14:53  
taunting of his father. He will accuse him of being homophobic. He will. Using them being bigoted, accuse him of being bullied, accuse him of being an abuser. It's hard, it's hard not to take the bait. The triangle with the younger daughter is different. There's probably an equal level of fusion. But in this case, his relationship with her generally stays quite positive, and this is quite tense with her sort of Fending off her mother and distancing from her. She it's interesting. Let me go back to this one. She has no questions about his competence in academics, but she worries about his ability to manage money and to function in the job sphere. He worries about him being depressed, like his older brother, and she is concerned with the daughter. She worries about the daughter weight. Daughter's weight, she tends to be a little overweight. She worries about her academics, but she doesn't have any concerns about her functioning in the job room. This one in particular has been tough for her to get her footing, and at one point I drew this diagram I use. Was using PowerPoint. So these two are looking at each other, and that's how the relationship is, even though it's tense and they sometimes repel each other. They're constantly looking at each other. Meantime, he's react. Reactive to how much she rescues and over, over supports, over, make suggestions, enables, and so he's watching her, and she's aware that he's watching her, and she's reactive to him watching her. Meantime, she's watching the daughter. And this was just an attempt to try and describe the way the process in the triangle was working. She found it very helpful, because she had not thought so much about how much he watched her and how much she reacted to him watching her, she wouldn't have done whatever You did. So I want to talk about two diagrams of reciprocity that I have done at different points in the process, using my notes and going over my notes, and these are all words that they use to describe themselves. So I'm not laying these on them. I'm pulling them out of my notes from sessions. And this is an attempt. Some of you who see me present with slides have seen a reciprocity slide that I do where they start out a little blue and a little pink, and they get darker and darker and bigger and and it's to show that you start out with a little difference, and then you start reacting to the difference, and then you drive each other to to more and more extremes of small natural distances that when you first get together in your relationship are very attractive and help make you have fun together and Want to get connected and, you know, and also make an emotional fit with each other. So I'm just going to talk about each side and walk through this and try to describe what I mean. He's a kind of proactive guy. He does a lot of planning. He does a lot of thinking about what he calls Auntie Murray's law, so that if he thinks ahead and plans ahead, and he'll be ready for what's going to go down and then he he won't misstep. He comes across as I know what to do, and a lot less in the last three years, but that's we're starting it. He's very active. He's planning positioning, you might say, over, using the eye position. Who really understands the eye position and the importance of it, but might be at risk for overusing it has a strong feeling it's up to me to do it. I've got to do this. This is a subtle one and a hard one to get at in reciprocity, but if you look at her descriptions as I talk about them, he would be invisibly activated by her passivity, and as I talk about her side of it, you'll see how they fit together so beautifully he's aware that he could be stuck in a way of interpreting that seems right to him but might not be again, these are his words. He definitely gets the bad guy, the heavy label, especially from his wife and his son. He has a kind of inherent fear, belief that the kids won't behave responsibly. So consequently, he tends to over monitor, and he tends to have a strong focus on don't help them. They need to learn to do it themselves. And you'll see again as I walk down this one how beautifully they fit together. She, on the other hand, despite being very high, professional, functioning and equally bright, gets to feeling overwhelmed, unclear, afraid to take any kind of stand in a situation she where he can quickly go to it's either or she's running through all the possibilities in her brain and can't sort of narrow down the field to what she most thinks is is reasonable. Spends a lot of time passively wringing her hands. In that way, she is a force that activates his activity out of her passivity and overwhelmness and wringing her hands, she feels, you know, I've fucked up. I'm paralyzed. Where do I go from here? I've fucked up so badly. How can I possibly rectify it? And she gets paralyzed if she does come up with something that's a nubbin of a thought and a plan, she's at risk for chickening out of it, and then she's harping on him and back seat driving what he's doing and criticizing him, and she's also at risk for going behind his back and undermining something he's doing with the kids. She's a rescuer of the kids with an undermining emotional feeling, they can't figure it out without me. They need me, and she so then that pulls her into problem solving for them, offering help when they haven't asked for help, enabling them, funding them, giving them money. Um,

Speaker 1  23:24  
so again, these are their words. They've been working on this. They're more and more aware of this, and it has toned down, considering now there's another interesting wrinkle during this time that I've been seeing them. Started out she already had a number of physical symptoms that she was consulting people about. They fall into the thyroid autoimmune area. She has a chronic cough. I'm trying to think of whether there's any other important pieces, those are important ones. Lately, she's also run into some musculoskeletal pain.

Speaker 1  24:20  
It developed that the apartment that they live in, in the university housing, because she's professor there and staff, has tons of mold in it, very high humidity and tons of mold. their rugs were growing mold, their mattress was growing mold, the clothes were growing mold. And here's another interesting divide. He's totally on the side of Western medicine. She tends to lean more towards Eastern medicine. She does. Yoga, she does silent retreats. She consults a naturopath, and so they have that difference too. But at any rate, through testing and examination, she turns out to have become reactive, slash allergic, to mold and one of the big clues for her was when she went on one of the two week trips away to Africa for her, Can you please close the chat? Thanks. Want to make sure so she, she, her symptoms went away as she as she spent some time there. I mean, not completely, but the cough was almost completely gone. So anyway, since then, they've been tussling with her physical symptoms and with the side effect of this problem, they encountered in their prompt their apartment that they were running, which is that they wanted to move to a different apartment in the university housing. And they've been tussling with university housing, and it's been very tense. I mean, since last fall, they've been living in temporary housing and in a very small kind of, sort of like a corporate suite kind of apartment. And, yeah, it's been very challenging. And they have finally, in recent weeks, reached an agreement, settled on an alternate apartment, and I think at the end of May, they'll be able to move or somewhere soon after that, they'll be able to move back into regular apartment and have their own things in their own furniture. So this is an attempt to talk about the reciprocity around her physical symptoms, and it includes some of the flash points around this whole issue of the apartment. So I'll go down his side first. He gets that her symptoms are a product of the family emotional system. I think he's less clear about the part that he plays in her disproportionately absorbing family anxiety in a physical way. Now it's interesting, because you could say he has disproportionately absorbed family anxiety in his difficulty putting together a professional career that he likes and is, you know, is an equal contributor to the family, especially Now that the children are lifted out of the house. So actually, what he's been doing in the last couple years is he decided he was interested in AI, and he's been self tutoring with mentors guiding him in the self tutoring. And he's he's been self tutoring and taking courses online, really like a job, working very assiduously at it, and now he's in the interviewing process of trying to get a position in the field, and he's definitely getting some nibbles. And he keeps getting moved along a number of levels in the interviewing process, but then he hasn't nailed a position yet. He's like, once again, he's in the middle of an interviewing process right now, even as we speak, he's not, this is these again, these are his words. He's not particularly interested in the details of her illness and her symptoms. And she, of course, is preoccupied with them. He worries she'll die like her mother did. Her mother died at 60. Her mother had, oh, an important fact I left out, her mother had diabetes, and her mother concealed the diabetes. Didn't want to talk about the diabetes. Had lots of symptoms from the diabetes, but the soul, the whole approach in the family was sort of, Buck up, keep going forward. You can't reveal your your weaknesses at work. Or you'll you know those, those guys who are after you as a woman in the field are going to get you. She's a contemporary of Ruth Bader Ginsburg, if that puts it into some some so she was dealing with the same type of challenge for a woman in the. Law profession at the same time as they knew each other. I'm worried she'll die like her mother. She can change this. It's fixable at its most intense, it's all in her head. I'm trying to be reasonable and cooperative. This is about the apartment and the accommodations, and he is, he definitely is, but he's concerned he'll adapt too much. He gave up the moldy apartment. He loved it. It wouldn't have been his choice to move. And so he's concerned, will I give up too much? Where is the end of adapting to the symptoms and the fear about the mold and the apartment now She, on the other hand, is at risk for thinking of the symptoms as caused by the mold and heavy metals. She's more and more willing to engage family emotional process and chronic anxiety playing a role, but she's at risk for getting focused on the series of practices that will manage the symptoms and do help her manage the symptoms, as opposed to trying to figure out, okay, I have a spike in my muscle tension, what's going on in my important systems? Where am I picking up anxiety? Where am I giving away self, inadvertently? So she's getting better at that. But very interesting part of that came out in a recent session, and this was really helpful for me, because I've been interested in people who somaticized for years. It's almost like the anxiety comes in and it goes into their body without reaching the level of awareness in their brain. And it's just it's an interesting process, and it's hard for people whose primary mechanism is so much situation to really get their hold of it. And then she articulated a few weeks months ago, if she lets herself feel the feeling, it's too much, she won't be able to deal with it. It's too overwhelming. Doesn't know what to do with it, so it just gets pushed away automatically and not looked at, and she's just beginning to sort of unearth that and realize that that works against her, but it's part of the way her whole family dealt with things. It comes from a strong family culture, and it's very automatic. She worries I'll die early, like my mother. She's in her early history. Her mother died at 60. She feels that it's insurmountable. I can't get over this. I'm overwhelmed. I hate it. She'll say, I hate it, but she doesn't have, hasn't had, I think she's beginning to develop a way of approaching it that it's possible to deconstruct it to some degree and see what the more fine grained emotional process is that's generating her symptoms. For example, she's been noticing times when she has more muscle tension, times when her cough is worse and trying to go back and problem solve what was going on, which I think is pretty constructive for all of us, and especially for people with physical symptoms, she feels like she can't handle it.

Speaker 1  34:08  
She's trying to be reasonable and cooperative as they negotiate with the university and about the apartment, they both are working in good faith, but they have all this garbage between them to deal with. She's concerned she'll adapt too much. For example, His I gave you an example of him going along with giving up the human moldy apartment. As as they approach moving into a new apartment, she's done a lot of research on ideal levels of humidity and what it should be in order to not promote an overgrowth of mold. And. Then he says, I don't like the sound of a human dehumidifier. I don't want dehumidifier in my living space. You can have one in the bedroom, but you I don't want in our living space. And then she's like, What do I go along with that? Am I going to endanger myself? What's reasonable? I know he's noise sensitive. You get the picture. She feels worried. She got sick in 705. Is the moldy apartment, so I worry about any ground floor apartment that they get offered. Ironically, the one that they're going for is a ground floor apartment, but she's decided she's going for it. If I don't make sure that I'm okay in the new apartment, I'll get sick again, and then I'll be back where I was okay so I think that's most of what I wanted to say. I will add that another reason for presenting them is the interesting challenge that they present, because I think the average person who observed them interacting with each other would take her side, and that's part of This process where he gets to be the bad guy he's he's a big, forceful, bright, active guy. They're both intense, but it takes a different shape. He sort of comes at people and he would say, I come on too intense. I Come on, too strong. She is quieter, more introverted. Looks more reasonable on the surface. So you get her describing all this stuff, and then you see the level of worry and anxiety and insecurity. He looks over confident. She looks under confident. He having the solution, comes towards her. She doesn't come back to him. He pushes out of his anxiety for her to go along with him. She says, yes, then she backs, he drives him and undermines him, and but this somehow comes across looking like the heavy, and this comes across looking like in her son's word, you know the victim, and he's the abuser and she's the victim. I've known them both for a long time. They're bright, capable people. They both have their strengths and their weaknesses somehow, especially in the middle of these really intense sessions in the early days of January, February, March, 2017, I've been able to see This reciprocity and consistently reflect it to them. You know, way that, theoretically, if Bowen wasn't smoking mushrooms, is supposed to allow the triangle to resolve to some degree, I think their own efforts have been not at all insignificant, but I also think that I've been useful to them in being able to see this as a co constructed 5050, proposition to a few other things I wanted to add this, having had a similar experience when a couple of our kids hit patchy times in adolescence, late adolescence, I know How sort of come to Jesus. Meeting that kind of experience can be if you are open to considering I wasn't doing as great as I thought I was as a parent, these people have put a lot of work in energy. Into themselves and and trying to be the best parents that they can be, the best partners if they can be. And it's sort of turned to shit in their hands, and it has been a very useful, humiliating experience, but what they've done is dig deep and go to work on themselves and try honestly, to address their part in it, like he was the original leader in that effort. He's the one who made contact with me and started this process. But she's certainly a willing participant, but well, maybe that's too strong, because she will say, he say, I I look forward to the sessions. I'm eager to come. And she'll say, I dread the sessions, but she's coming, don't get me wrong, but it's the it's the hard work of the picking apart, of the emotional functioning and and the patterns in the family,

Speaker 1  41:07  
maybe I'll think of other things as we talk in the Q and A. So why don't we move along to that? And we have about 45 minutes, if you would want to ask a question or make a comment, would you please type into the chat room and if everybody would activate their video, if you would wDave Galloway is the first speaker up

Speaker 1  41:46  
It looks like Dave Hoover's Randy Frost is the first batter up as

Unknown Speaker  41:52  
often with Dave. Dave. Oh, okay

Dave Galloway  41:56  
from Dave, yeah, sorry, I post. I was thinking of a question to post you privately, and then evolved it. My first thought was, you know, when is mold just mold and you need to get rid of it, versus some big family system process? And then it occurred to me that maybe it's really about it doesn't matter what the mold really is. It matters how they think and function around it together. And so that's where I landed. I So what do you how do you think their functioning was around this issue of mold? And it almost doesn't matter whether it was real or not. It's how I'm thinking about it.

Speaker 1  42:41  
I agree with that it, I It's been interesting to me. I've read enough about the research in the area of mold to know that there's something to it. But as I was saying in the reciprocity, she would be at risk for blaming everything on the mold, and he would be at risk for saying it's all in your head. If you just get your head straightened out, you won't react to the mold. That's extremes, okay, but that's the risk, and then that complicates dealing in a reality fashion, with an apartment where there's literally mold growing in the walls, the mattress, the clothes, the rugs and so, yeah, do you want to say any more?

Dave Galloway  43:31  
Would you see parallels with how they operate with their kids? Is how they operate with this other organism?

Unknown Speaker  43:39  
Oh, wash your mouth out with soap.

Dave Galloway  43:44  
Well, no, I mean, it's just like the project, you know, like it's all the volts fault, I've got to do this. And the other person saying, no, no, you're exaggerating. Blah, blah, was there some, you know, flavor of that in functioning with the kids?

Speaker 1  43:58  
Yeah, sure. They're very much at risk for blaming each other, for the way that each of them deals with the kids being why the kids have the problems, right, right? And, you know, on her side, it's it's hard one that she's come to see a he's not always too strict. He does smell the coffee and see where there might be a useful boundary to be drawn. Um, he's not just a hard ass. He's got some good ideas. He's not just mean, and he's not big and bully, but I make him into that with the way I conceptualize in that way, or I solidify that so that. Would be one example I can think of others. Any thoughts come to you?

Dave Galloway  45:04  
No, no, that's great. Thank you. I want to let others, some ask the questions. That was good.

Unknown Speaker  45:10  
So be Randy first. Randy,

Speaker 2  45:14  
yeah, Kathy, I was wondering, as part of this effort, has each of them worked on themselves in relation to their original family, and whatever the emotional programming was that took place there, that plays out between them and in relation to the kids.

Speaker 1  45:35  
Yeah, I, um, both of them have taken their extended families seriously? Um, I don't know, and this would be a good question for them. I can give you an example from current days. I don't know how well they've grasped their functional positions in their families of origin. I'll give you an example. Recently, her her father died. Her father had a second wife. He remarried, so she's the widow, and there very unlike her mother, not professional, not well educated, and kind of grasping and money involved attached at the same time, from the moment she came into the equation, she wasn't good enough, but she notes, she notes, none of the in laws are good enough in this family, we're pretty we're pretty hard act to break into. So now her father died last year, and this estate is being probated and it is. It's a very tough pill for her to swallow, areas where her stepmother, as her father declined and had dementia issues, maneuvered him into giving her more of the estate than he had originally planned, and told the kids that he would do so trying to figure out what parts of that are fightable because the conservator of his he had a conservator of this state before he died, and the conservator wasn't very on top of things and didn't catch things. And you know, you got a couple attorneys here, and you got bright attorneys, but she gets so angry and so upset and outraged, and it has led to a long discussion, lots of discussion about this and how she fit into it, and I think that's becoming more clear. It's becoming more clear that her parents are pretty preoccupied with this and keep her going and and the the and the lines of communication were not very open. Here it was, buck up. Over achieve suck it up. Do your best. Don't ask for help. And again, it's, it's all on the subtle, subtle message, it's not over. So she's starting to get more of a handle on how that plays out, with her intense focus on helping her kids, being a resource, and then coming to her and using her, and you get the picture. You know, on the other hand, this guy, you know, is the is the caboose baby in this family, very bright there. Everybody's bright here, too. But he's, well, there's an MBA here that she's quite distant from the family. There's an MD, there's a doctor of Optometry. But I think he and I circled this sister. She was his second mother, and she really Kerr took for him, but there was a very interesting vignette that he told me, and I just went, Wow, when he told me it. I don't know that he gets the significance of it. I've tried to explore it. But when she was going to nursing school. Forget exactly how many years older than he she is. Sorry, I need a lot of the whole family kept the knowledge that she was leaving to go away to nursing school from him until either the night before or the day that she left. And I was like, Whoa, doesn't that betray a kind of sensitivity to you and your ability to deal with things and cope with changes in the family and what's going to happen. You get the picture. Let me show up and see if you have any other questions or comments.

Speaker 2  50:46  
No, I was just wondering if, if an active effort in each person's original family is part of the overall effort to pull up in the nuclear family.

Speaker 1  51:00  
They worked that for many years, and they still were in an impasse. It really hasn't been till they got sort of brought to their knees and they dug in, that they've really addressed this in a productive way, and they've addressed these triangles in a corruptive way. They inched up on them over the years as they worked on all this, but I wouldn't say they had hard gains in their hands like they seem to have. Now you want to say more about what you're thinking.

Speaker 2  51:41  
No, I was just just thinking about the interplay between the effort in the nuclear family and then the effort in the original family and the reciprocal process of gains in one affecting the other.

Speaker 1  51:59  
That'd be a good question to go back to them with. They're going to watch this video, by the way, so I'll ask them next week. By the way, also they asked to meet twice a week. And I said, Hey, if you think that's that would be useful. I'll try and so we meet twice a week, and it's never boring, and there's never a lack of material so and there's never something they're not each working on. So as long as it keeps going like that, I'll keep going with it. Okay? Michael Joan, first, yeah. Then. Michael

Speaker 3  52:57  
Kathy, I thought this was a really nice, clear description of reciprocity and how something can start in a relationship really small. I'd like your diagram, and it can grow. I've seen a number of couples that the way, that's the way I think about the way they present it, but they don't know who see it that way. And I'd like to your terminology. It's a good emotional fit. I hadn't used that term before that somehow it works when the tension is down. What I hadn't thought about before that you mentioned is about how the symptom, how the the anxiety, kind of the woman didn't feel it, experienced it in her body more in her emotions. And it just made me think that maybe in terms of, like with the mold, how that kind of takes energy and it affects the relationship. And it made me think about the value of experiencing things emotionally. I would tend to experience things in my body like a headache, and I always feel that that's better than emotions, but if you experience emotions, you got some shot at some motivation to resolve the actual things that's provoking anxiety. And I have a question, one question, how was it they were both in the training program, since she's a lawyer and maybe he was a minister at the time. But I was just curious about what motivated them both to go on the training program.

Speaker 1  54:30  
I don't remember what originally exposed them to Bowen theory, that's a good question. It's so far back I don't remember. Yeah, I honestly don't, there was something you said though that I wanted to come back to, yeah, he was, he was a minister, the kerfuffle in his parish. I think it happened after they had done a number of years. In the training program and have moved on. I don't think he I think we were talking on the phone when that happened. I'm pretty sure. And again, that's a good example where I believe him when he says that he did not do what the woman says he did that she misunderstood his care and interest in her and his giving her a hug and a kiss on the cheek after a counseling session, spiritual counseling session, this guy's not a liar. In fact, you know truth and honor and being good to your word is extremely important to him, but it was very disruptive and interrupted a career that he was in the early years of doing he was an assistant pastor. Remember what you were saying about reciprocity that I wanted to comment on. Maybe it'll come back to me. Do you

Unknown Speaker  56:14  
want to say more? Joan,

Speaker 3  56:20  
no, I just if it comes back to you, let me know. But I had just mentioned how it starts off small and it gets bigger, and how two people start off with a good emotional fit, and then somehow it doesn't look that way under tension.

Speaker 1  56:36  
Yeah, I mean, and you know, at their best, in the mild forms of their innate, automatic responses, they really compliment each other, and they've been doing more of that and less of this as they worked on understanding it. It's ironic. I like to think of it. It's ironic that the differences that draw you to each other start to become sand under the bathing suit as you get reactive to them in each other. I think it's Michael Gilman, yes. It is. Michael Gilman,

Speaker 4  57:22  
yes, thank you, Kathleen, for your presentation. It's really clear and and helpful. And I really like the sort of outlay of the reciprocity, which got me thinking about, sort of what's the impact that outside helpers or providers have on their reciprocal process in the in a marriage, you, I think, clearly defined a way at which you were trying to relate to them and to manage that triangle. But I was thinking about the challenge when somebody is trying to figure out a symptom like or trying to trying to figure out what's what their symptoms are, what might be contributing to the symptoms, and something like mold, I think, is a good example of things where there's great divide in in the in the Eastern and Western ways of thinking about that kind of health issue, which would stir, I think, anxiety or doubt or question within the individual about what really is contributing to these symptoms, some, some might be anxiety, but some are legitimate physical things. And so I don't know if you have some thoughts about sort of outsiders, other than you know a Bowen trained, skillful therapist influencing the reciprocity in the relationship.

Speaker 1  58:42  
Well, ideally, you know, family practitioners, naturopaths, spiritual counselors, attorneys, you know, we'd be thinking like this in a way that can be useful to a couple in facing their unwitting, inadvertent reactivity, driven reciprocity with each Other. You want to say more about what you were thinking

Speaker 4  59:26  
just that. I guess the differentiation for self, I guess when, in terms of what Bowen is talking about, is, how does one learn to sort of differentiate between their own thinking process, what their principles or values might be, with the emotional side of their functioning, and symptoms kind of representing an emotional side, and how one, I think, can get overwhelmed or confused with any kind of symptoms about what, what are all the factors that might. Be contributing to that, so that, I guess that's what I was appreciating when you were talking about this, maybe from her perspective,

Speaker 1  1:00:06  
well, doctors can jump on the bandwagon of chasing the symptoms, and for someone like like her, she'd be at risk for her her her natural worry and dread and aversion to her symptoms being heightened by caregiver getting focused in on the symptoms and chasing the symptoms and so, yeah, she's up against that. I think we're all up against that. I She talks about how she gets spooked by these symptoms, and she can't, she literally can't think. All she's thinking is, I hate it. I want it to go away. And so that's that's a real challenge. You want to say any more? Michael, no, that's it. I think it's Eric.

Speaker 5  1:01:10  
Hi, Kathleen, here's what I was thinking after hearing this very detailed, clear presentation that have a now, one of the most experienced Bowen theory therapists in the country, present, you know, working with this couple, very highly engaged couple, postgraduate level training. And I was thinking, looks to me this could be wrong, that the impact of the treatment was quite stabilizing to the marriage, because, I mean, this is a marriage that there had been all kinds of pretty hot risk, points to The stability of the marriage that they've managed to weather looks like less of an impact on the health symptom in the wife. And you explored that in an interesting way. What I was wondering was, you know, if we ever could do randomized, controlled studies of the impact of the methods that have currently been developed from Bowen theory, if we might find that to be generally true, that they they have a more powerful impact on something like a marriage or the stability of a parent child relationship or sibling relationship, than on health. It's something I've thought about over the years, just one it's a question I've had over the years. Wouldn't mean the theory is wrong to me that the relationship process powerfully impacts health, just it would just say, just give us more information about the therapies we've developed.

Speaker 1  1:03:07  
I think that's a very interesting hypothesis, certainly in trying to get to the fine, granular deconstruction of the process around her symptoms, both within her and in the relationship, I've gotten an even healthier respect for The automaticity of anxiety going in to the internalizer somaticizer, in a way that it's very difficult to grab a hold of it and look at it. You know, if what happens to you is when the anxiety goes up, you say, you start becoming a total blabber mouth that's a little easier to observe, then a half an hour later, you have a pounding headache, or you wake up the next morning and your shoulders are in a knot, or your cough gets worse. So I have developed, I my first level of respect for this people who are dealing with this was back when I was on the faculty of the Bowen center, and I used to listen to my colleagues in the biofeedback department presenting their clinical cases and just how automatic this process is and how out of awareness it happens. And I have my own, um. Version of so many somatic sizing. I mean, I have a kind of a healthy mix of behavioral manifestations and somatic manifestations and relationship manifestations. I think it's a little easier to get a hold of it. If that's you have a mix. It's sort of like when the symptoms are in a lot of places in the family, they're using a lot of different emotional processes. Little easier to get a hold of it then. Then, if you're a kind of specialist in something anyway, you want to say more,

Speaker 5  1:05:36  
just add that. You know, I'm just wondering, like, as you just described, you know, maybe the therapy we've developed, I'm, I'm, I'm very convinced, just watching over time, of the of the powerful impact it has on relationship process, like we were describing, but that, yeah, I wonder if it, it's A little harder for it to penetrate into autonomic processes, or the more autonomic process. The other thing is that, you know, maybe there's, obviously there's, there's a variation in the degree to which something like you've described, the reciprocity impacts the health symptom. I don't think we've got that all spelled out either. You know, just like maybe some cancers are 90% about that, and others are only 10. I don't think you're ever going to get to one. That's zero. It's

Speaker 1  1:06:36  
very interesting, because you're talking about the therapy and the approach. One of the things that I think is different for me, I don't know how to date it, at least the last 10 years, I would say, is I have a firmer conviction that people can deal with each other in joint sessions, and in addition that that joint sessions allow them the opportunity to get a hold of the fusion and the reciprocity. So I am more clear about that, more confident in my ability to do it with people, and more clear about the value of almost insisting on it with people. And I've had a lot of good results clinically with it. So it's so hard to so easy to avoid your part in the marital reciprocity. When you're just one person talking, you're sitting there doing it with each other. It's kind of hard to ignore. Anyway. That was, do you want to say any more?

Speaker 5  1:08:03  
Eric, well, could you just describe a little bit? What was your state of mind before you got that increased confidence? And how would you practice before that,

Speaker 1  1:08:15  
I probably had more faith in individual efforts, one on one, working on the nuclear and extended family that I have now, because I've had a number of people over the years, like this couple who kind of had an exclusive run in that and I knew and I was Trying my best in the individual coaching sessions to challenge them, to look at it. It's not just that he's a bossy bullier. It's not just that she's a wimpy enabler. You know, it's more than that. But I'd say the combo, there's all and he would be extremely articulate about this. He can come to the point of tears about this in the session, the value of being brought to your knees by a symptom in your kid that you thought you were raising perfectly. Yeah, this guy's written two books on parenting based in Bowen theory. He thought he knew how to do it. He thought he was and he was very well intentioned. And he'd be the first to say, Oh, my God, you know. I mean not to tell a story out of school, but this lovely man doing the tech today, one time he was doing a presentation, and he in the presentation, he said, I thought I was going to raise children over 50 on the scale. And I was, I kind of gasped, and later that night, I said, you thought out of us, we were going to raise children over 50 on the scale. Where is that going to come? Come from, you know, so we have, I thought, until symptoms developed in our kids, that I was a great mother, and I was doing it perfectly, and then I got cut off at the knees. So that was very valuable. I don't want to underestimate that I had nothing to do with that I did not write to their children or call them and urge them to develop symptoms, but I did when it happened, insist on them coming together, and it's been fruitful. Wanna say any more?

Unknown Speaker  1:10:34  
No. Thank you, Kathy. Thank you

Speaker 1  1:10:37  
for the comments and questions. Sarah Davis has written out something Well, Amy is first. Well, okay, sorry.

Speaker 6  1:10:47  
Thank you. I've been thinking a lot about how sometimes reciprocity can get a bad rap, as if it is a problem. And I was flipping around this idea with this particular couple about how would this reciprocity have been a superpower when they faced previous challenges, and would they see it as not a dilemma of eliminating the reciprocity, but having more agency over how the reciprocity functions toward the adaptive Challenge, rather than takes over at an automatic level.

Speaker 1  1:11:22  
I couldn't say it better. I mean, when they're when they're grooving and complimenting each other, I don't know that I would want to come up against them in a challenging situation. I mean, good luck to their university in dealing with them on this housing situation when they can tone down their reactivity and work together as a cooperative team, presenting their point of view and desires orally or in writing, they're gangbusters. Do they see that? Oh, I think they do more and more. I hope they do, because they certainly compliment each other. And one of the interesting things I'm glad you asked about it, is part of this reciprocity is that she would let him be the DR, the front seat driver, so he would be imagining and negotiating her contract with the next university that she worked for. Now, he might not be on the front end, but he would be telling her what she should get and what was fair and yada yada yada. This is her university, where they live in the housing, and he has seen how his doing that is not useful to him, and so he has pulled back and said, You're perfectly capable you. I'll go with you, but you lead the meeting. It's your university, it's your housing office. Here's my thoughts about what would be the best argument. But hey, this is your this is your situation, and it is working much, much better, much much better.

Speaker 6  1:13:09  
So that provokes another question for me, the degree to which the symptoms and the kids emerge in response to a shift in that reciprocity, would they be able to like take it five steps backwards to notice that the children might be responding to a change in how parents are interacting with one another, and then representing that shift intention in themselves, rather than letting it stay in the dyad?

Speaker 1  1:13:39  
Well, I guess what I would say, what I know of the pro dromal period, before the symptoms got so intense that, especially with the first point, son, that they were really challenged, is that things ramped up during adolescence as he became less enamored of his father as the expert and the person who would help him with his homework and coaching with his soccer and yada yada yada yada yada, So that that this used to be much less fraught, and she started Dave Ling in probably sex drugs, rocks and roll. I don't think it was too super serious. So them that was all going on sort of simultaneously. Now you're asking a very valuable question, trying to not ask them is, was there chronic anxiety going up and the way they were dealing with each other going up as the kids got into adolescence? A perfectly plausible question.

Speaker 6  1:14:58  
I. Is there time and space for one more? Oh, absolutely. I was just gonna ask you. Well, I was curious about the degree to which the shifting around the parents, ie, the grandparents in this is also putting downward pressure on that marriage. So when her father died, vis a vis when the kids are emerging into adolescence and the interplay between the generations, asking the dyad to function reciprocally in new ways, would they I don't know enough of the facts around that.

Speaker 1  1:15:35  
Well, it's a very good question. She is more actively month to month, year to year, involved with this family than he is. he has been at a further distance, especially when they were on the East Coast. Part of his motivation to get her to take a West Coast job when she was job hunting the last time was to get her away from her family, in which she is too enmeshed. So there's that, and then there's his dad's been dead for a while, as is her mother. But these two parents have been on a downward trajectory in recent years, they're both very responsible. They visited. They've been active in helping their siblings with care. It's been the deaths both came after fairly long periods of decline, so I have not seen the deaths unnerving people the way a more acute death. Can, you, know, ramp this up really remarkably. Do you want to say any more? Am I addressing your question?

Speaker 6  1:16:58  
You are. I think, I think it is interesting to consider how a functional role in relationship to one's parents as they are aging, as that is shifting at the same time as a functional role in a parenting position is shifting, that would destabilize the heck out of me. I could see myself putting more pressure on my partner to behave in certain ways, to help settle me down. So just I was thinking about that. Thank you.

Speaker 1  1:17:27  
A lot of sense the way you said it. And you know, oftentimes people in this age range with this constellation will be described being caught between two generations, both of which require their care and attention and feeling it a bit of a squeeze play in a way that can definitely ramp up the anxiety. Then we have one more. Let me see we consider that symptom development can be driven by crying anxiety and being in the one down position. How does this couple think about the wife's experience of rejection in the triangle with the husband and daughter as possibly contributory to the development of the wife sentence, good question. What I need to do is go back to the drawing board in terms of, I think this constellation with the younger daughter was since forever. I don't think it changed over time, but that's certainly a good question to ask her and them. Um, what changed? What I'm clear changed over time is this kind of beautiful, my my beautiful boy child, my competent father. Thing, as often happens in adolescence, did a flip. I think this is since forever, this kind of tension between the two of them, it may have ramped up in adolescence. So I will try to remember to ask that question. Do you want to say any more? I

Unknown Speaker  1:19:24  
I guess not. So it's back to Vancouver and Randy frost. Oh, Sarah, did you want to say more?

Speaker 7  1:19:32  
I did. I didn't realize I was I was still muted. Thank you. I was just thinking about how you were describing a family with an inflammatory process going on, and what might be contributing to that, and that's, that's was the what was what I was thinking about. And I think what you're saying is, there are, you know. There are different triangles in the family and that that they become activated at different times. And it isn't necessarily you're thinking that the triangle with the daughter and the husband didn't wasn't necessarily obviously activated before the symptom development. But in what way does it contribute? And in what way is the wife, the way you describe the wife, it sounds like she may be, you know, very human in her rejection sensitivity, perhaps. And what, what?

Speaker 1  1:20:34  
Oh, she, well, she's very sensitive to this, and they are very sensitive to being rejected by each other. It's everywhere, and he is sensitive to his rejection, and vice versa, it's everywhere. But what I was chuckling about is it's both an inflammatory family, and she deals with inflammatory symptoms, and so it's both in the physiology and it's in the behavior. I mean, these people can get physical with each other. They haven't for a long time. They could say the meanest, nastiest things to each other. And she could, after yielding, yielding, yielding, yielding, feeling pushed, feeling push. She could turn around and jump on this big guy's back like a Hornet and and then he didn't know what to do with her. And it's I, I think a video of one of these fights would be a thing of beauty.

Unknown Speaker  1:21:38  
Thank you. Thank

Unknown Speaker  1:21:39  
you. So Randy frost in Vancouver?

Speaker 2  1:21:44  
Yeah, I was thinking about the function of theory over the years for this couple. I mean, they were in the postgraduate program. They've had coaching. They've been serious students of it. To what extent has the theory been a real resource to them over the years? And were there ways at times, where some of the concepts of the theory, perhaps the way they interpreted them or tried to implement them, actually got in the way, maybe hearing in part or understanding concepts which, in turn, were not useful. Kind of

Speaker 1  1:22:33  
multiple choice answer, all of the above. I mean, he really gets inadvertently hampering your children developing independently. And he really gets that behavior should have consequences. He really gets the concept of the eye position, but he might take all those things a little further, little more extreme than a more modulated understanding of Bowen theory would take them. She comes across. He comes across focused on the practical, and how do I deal with this and what do I do next? And she comes across with thinking about the broad patterns and processes, but she can be at risk for missing the details, and he can be at Miss for missing the broad patterns that are going on behind the details, if that makes any sense.

Speaker 2  1:23:48  
Okay, so it's both a resource and, you know, it's a work in progress.

Speaker 1  1:23:55  
They're the very first people I've ever known who have been at risk for bastardizing Bowen theory, I certainly, and I'm sure You didn't either

Unknown Speaker  1:24:15  
I'm listening.

Speaker 1  1:24:21  
We got a few minutes left. Is there anybody else who would like to comment or ask a question?

Speaker 8  1:24:34  
Can I just add one please? Yeah, your illustration of how you worked on this yourself really got me thinking, Kathy, that we're all in process. And as much as theory has been important to me in the last 30 plus years, that I've really been working with it actively, I can miss it so easily. And I. I think that's true of all of us, and just in my own work, with my own family, with my own children, my wife, I'm a few weeks after the death of my father, and I what I'm watching the reactivity in my family, but I'm not sure how clearly I can see it. So I'm trying to think, you know, how am I going to relate to my mother? How do I relate to my brothers, my wife, my own children? Now, in a way that's different, now that my father's gone, and I'm really aware that my thinking is kind of cloudy right now, so I'm continuing to think about all of that. And even if we've been worked with theory a long time. It doesn't mean we don't have to go back to the basics and just say, I can miss this stuff. So you, you really helped me to see that again. So thank you for that.

Unknown Speaker  1:25:51  
Well, I think your comments are right on target. I mean, I think when,

Speaker 1  1:25:59  
when you're struggling either because of the regression or because you're just beginning to get your feet on the ground. With theory, it's usually post talk that you begin to see the pattern and the process and the part that you're unwittingly playing in it. You know, yes, then over time, with consistent application and practice and practice experience, people have I've had, and people that I've coached have had what I call a magic moment where you're in the process, you might be up to your knees in the process, and you're seeing it and you're dealing with it effectively as it flies. That's what I call a magic moment. Yes, thank you.

Unknown Speaker  1:26:59  
Think we got it covered. That no more in the chat.

Speaker 1  1:27:06  
Anyone else going once, going twice? My dog is down on my feet. She thinks it's time to go for a walk. So I guess I will close us out and say thank you for your attention and your good questions and comments, and I will see you from the other side of the camera next month. Thank you. You.

