Speaker 1  00:36
Not clinical case. And I picked the subject that you will see once the PowerPoints are pulled up, and we can do that when

Unknown Speaker  00:46
Cathy's ready. You

Speaker 1  01:13
okay, there you see what I've chosen, the fundamental processes involved in triangles.

Unknown Speaker  01:23
Next slide, please. Intro

Speaker 1  01:29
a favorite quote of mine, which I wanted to get into my last book. I couldn't get a response from the publisher to allow me to do it. It's a Rudyard Kipling poem, I think, first stanza, he wrote this in the 1920s, I believe father, mother and me, sister and Auntie say, all people like us, are we? Everyone else is they? And they live over the sea, but we live over the way would you believe it? Look upon us? We as only a sort of they,

Unknown Speaker  02:18
this one please.

Speaker 1  02:20
So just to emphasize this groupiness,

Unknown Speaker  02:25
and how triangles fit in to

Speaker 1  02:32
understanding that groupiness is a step toward understanding the triangle concept in Bowen theory. Next one, please, and very important things happen in this other child relationship. I don't have to sell that point of view to anybody. Quote Murray Bowen, we live our lives in networks of emotional forces. Follow triangle patterns. I actually have a plaque on my wall giving given to me by someone in Washington when I was down there, and it has this quote of

Unknown Speaker  03:21
Bowen's.

Speaker 1  03:25
And this is a main artist, Jamie Wyeth, called this envy. And when I looked at this painting, the way I interpreted it interpreted is that two of these seagulls are involved with each other, and the one below is the outsider, and he chose envy for the envy, the desire to be one of the insiders within the family emotional system, the emotional tensions shift about an orderly series of emotional alliances and rejections. Triangles are the molecules of an emotional system. It's one of my favorite quotes from Bowen, molecules of an emotional system. A two person system is inherently unstable. Another Bowen quote, what makes a two person system unstable? Human beings have an intense need for emotional closeness, but are also allergic to too much of it. Another Bowen quote, of course, next one. So now I'm going to talk triangle basics before going on to some other things about the triangle this. This illustrates a triangle and a state of relative calm. The blue square and the blue circle represent the inside positions and down below the red circle emphasizes the outside position the triangle is in a state of relative Calm.

Unknown Speaker  05:37
Next one, please. Next one please.

Speaker 1  05:42
Outsider predictably makes moves form an alliance with one of the insiders. Stability and calmness of the insiders depends on exclusion of the outsider. I think that's an extraordinarily important insight. And so this is a dynamic equilibrium. A triangle is in state of dynamic equilibrium. So now the triangle is moving into a tension state, and now the two insiders are both quite anxious and feeling the pain of that, and the outsider is actually now in a better position. Both insiders make efforts to involve the third in their tension, producing process, their conflict. You see the arrows down at the outsider, the one former insider, comes the new, uncomfortable outsider, least for a time, and that could be, say, a father in a family. Now mother and child are the inside positions. So this is very high attention. States,

Unknown Speaker  07:21
very red, very red, 

Speaker 1  07:25
okay, the outside position then becomes the most comfortable one, and it's a kind of one of the insiders distances into the outside position, get away from the tension, and then the conflict develops between the former outsider at the bottom And the insider. You see these patterns, and you reminds me, many people think this can all be described by mathematical formulas. I think they got some kind of a point there. I don't know what the math would look like all this predictability. And how do you could you apply mathematical principles to that? So now the advantage of the outside position has let you and her fight. I'm out. I'm out now, and I'm calmer. It's the preferred position and the highly anxious insiders

Unknown Speaker  08:47
attempt now

Speaker 1  08:49
to involve a fourth person in the process, and this becomes the interlocking triangle idea. So the highly anxious insiders attempt to involve a fourth person in the process, etc, etc, etc, and that's the way process can spread through a family, of course, or social group. What they mean is it is impossible to see triangles without shifting from individual cause and effect thinking to systems thinking, of course, was Bowen's insight at NIH cause and effect thinking assigns the cause of a person's behavior to processes that operate then that person. Triangles are about people's behavior being regulated by a relationship process all members contribute to equally. When parents say yes, we know we are very reactive to our son. That's because of the way he is acting. Now, that's not systems thinking. It's blaming the triangle on one member. Now, just to review some points about the emotional system, which triangles embedded in the emotional system of the human and likely in other animals, to recognize and manage triangles effectively, it is essential To acquire more than an intellectual knowledge of them, underlying emotional forces and how one participates in the intensification and maintenance of the forces must be grabs fully next one. So of course, who do we turn to when we start talking about evolution? Is Darwin's second book, The Expression of the Emotions, how animals and humans Express and signal to others their emotions. I got a dog lying here on the floor now is trying to sleep, but some say the dog understands the human feeling process better than any other mammal on Earth, even the chimp. So again, a Bowen quote, the emotional system is the force that motivates, that drives the behavior the relationship system is the way it is expressed. So just to summarize these three systems that Bowen articulated, emotional system concludes, instinct, reproduction, the autonomic nervous system, subjective states, forces governing relationship systems contact with cellular and somatic processes. So this is a bodily

Unknown Speaker  12:21
operation. The feeling system.

Speaker 1  12:29
Aspects of emotional functioning register on the cerebral cortex as feelings bridge that is in contact with superficial aspects of the emotional system functioning and with the intellectual system, feelings, thus have a very important role. And the intellectual system, of course, think, reason and reflect, and that makes possible within limits conscious control over automatic reactivity, which, of course, is part of the process of differentiation of self. Thanks. Now, this is one of my favorite quotes of all. It's a book I ordered some years ago called defining the wind. It was by Scott hewler,

Unknown Speaker  13:29
and here's his quote.

Speaker 1  13:33
There was something about describing the wind that sparked expressive language. And I think the answer is that the wind is invisible. You can't describe it because you can't see it. You can only describe what it does to things that you can see, sails, the sea, trees, roof tiles. Describe clouds, trees or anything else you focus in on that specific thing to describe the win you do the opposite you look at everything else. It's mind expanding. This, I think, is identical what family systems theory tries to enable people to do. You can see it in the impact it's having on the various functional levels of the people in the family system and social system. So again, just to emphasize next one talking about the interactive process that you can't really see,

Unknown Speaker  14:51
but you can see

Speaker 1  14:55
interpret it from the way People in the family system change their functioning.

Speaker 1  15:06
This is the pride and joy of all, that it's possible to be objective, emotional objectivity is possible that, and that's the key note, I think you recognize to differentiation of self, the ability following emotional objectivity comes neutrality. Another way to say that is that rather than the situation being viewed as toxic, it can be viewed as interesting. That is a basis for acting in a new way in relationship to others in the system. Triangle is a big part of this. So man is an evolving life, evolving form of life. He is more related to lower forms of life, and he is different from them, you know, whose quote this is, of course, Murray Bowen. Most psychological theories focus on the uniqueness of man, other than his relatedness to the biological world, and that the instinctual forces that govern all animal protoplasmic behavior are more basic in human behavior, most theories recognize so of so I'm just going to touch on the NIMH study project, because that's where all these ideas began to spring up in Bowen's mind in that short period between 1954 and 59 of course, the study, among other things, produced a new theory of human development. So this is a effort to summarize some of the key things that came out, NIMH and all these two arrows back and forth.

Unknown Speaker  17:26
Are,

Speaker 1  17:30
you know, depicting or symbolizing the the way people are behaving in relation to one another and need for the other, seeing that an NIMH analogy to too much closeness to the other mentioned earlier, loss of each other equals death, reciprocity, Emotional programming, over under, functioning, closeness, distance cycles, anxiety, transfer and conflict, and that you die or I die, and be on a continuum from manageable to somebody dies.

Unknown Speaker  18:21
That's one

Speaker 1  18:22
that want to summarize in imH and those extraordinary discoveries that were made there, and triangles were first seen there. Emotional interdependence is so great that disturbances in the relationship profoundly threaten one's survival. I've mentioned at other presentations through the years that that's how I think what drove my brother's

Unknown Speaker  18:56
suicide.

Speaker 1  18:59
Now, back in 1969 long time ago, now, there was the threat to the interdependence.

Unknown Speaker  19:08
Next one, please.

Speaker 1  19:11
So it's on a continuum, manageable to you die or I die. But here I just might be of use to take some of these various terms we use in Bowen theory, and I believe these are all fundamentally equivalent terms, all getting at the same thing, unresolved symbiotic attachment, unresolved emotional attachment, emotional fusion, functional interdependence and undifferentiation. They're all describing the same fundamental process. And of course, below is the continuum of the degrees of these things, on the left side with porous emotional boundaries and on top of each other, and in the drawings on the right side, people who are better defined and and that can that became the basis of the, what he first called the scale of differentiation. I currently prefer the term continuum of differentiation, because we don't really have a scale that you can step on and figure out what it is. It'd be great if we had it this one. So this is going to be about the development of the self, all part of the triangle. The theory postulates two opposing basic life forces. One is a built in life growth force toward individuality and the differentiation of a separate self. What I like about this quote is that it goes it firmly life forces, and I don't think there's any other field except physics that deals with forces in the way Bowen theory does. It includes forces. There is a researcher we're going to have at the BTA sponsored meeting in October coming up, Marta Bertolo, from Italy, and she is describing life forces. I forget that that's the same word. She's using different kind of way of describing it, but same basic idea, the need to think in terms of forces, and the other again, is the equally intense emotional closeness force. So so one of my favorite, I got a lot of favorite quotes here. Brain scans show synchrony between the brains of the mother and child. What they can't show is the internal bond that belongs to neither alone. Fusion, her term in which the cell feels so permeable, it doesn't matter whose body is whose. And this was a quote in the New York Times Book Review years ago, the brain on love. Diane Ackerman, beautifully said. Next one, neural alchemy. Neuro alchemy continues throughout life, as we mature and form relationships, dabble in affairs, succumb to romantic love, choose a soul mate. The body remembers how that oneness with mother felt longs for its equivalent. I think that's just a very powerful insight on her part, which is consistent, of course, Bowen theory, excellent. And Bowen called these the infantile yearnings. And those, these are some of my favorites. This is what he spelled out, the goals and wishes, infantile yearnings, the schizophrenic adult child, member of extremely unresolved, symbiotic attachment to be taken care of nursed, freedom from responsibility. Have adequate, all loving, all giving, non demanding, figure always at your side. Now, Jack Butler put this in his book The Origins of Family Psychotherapy,

Unknown Speaker  23:43
published by

Speaker 1  23:45
aaronson a number of years ago now, 2013 those, I think, keeping those yearnings, because they're part of all of us.
